README.md, before:

# STAC API - Aggregation Extension

- **OpenAPI specification:** TBD
- **Conformance Classes:**
  - <https://api.stacspec.org/v1.0.0-rc.2/aggregation>
- **Extension [Maturity Classification](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-api-spec/tree/v1.0.0-rc.2/README.md#maturity-classification):** Proposal
- **Dependencies:**
  - [Core](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-api-spec/tree/v1.0.0-rc.2/core)

The purpose of the Aggregation Extension is to provide an endpoint similar to the Search endpoint (`/search`), but which will provide aggregated information on matching Items rather than the Items themselves. This is highly influenced by the Elasticsearch aggregation endpoint, but with a more regular structure for responses.

## STAC Endpoints

| Endpoint     | Returns                                                        | Description |
| ------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------- |
| `/aggregate` | AggregationCollection | Retrieves an aggregation of the group of Items matching the provided predicates |

The `/aggregate` endpoint behaves similarly to the `/search` endpoint, but instead of returning an ItemCollection of Items, it instead returns aggregated information over the same matching Items in the form of an **AggregationCollection** of **Aggregation** entities.

If the `/aggregate` endpoint is implemented, it is **required** to add a link with the `rel` type set to `aggregate` to the `links` array in root entity (`/`) that refers to the aggregate endpoint in the `href` property. 

`/aggregatables` link and endpoint?

query and filter extensions can be added with #query and #filter appended to cc uri

## Filter Parameters and Fields

The filters for `/aggregate` are the same as those for `/search` that are semantically meaningful (e.g., limit has no meaning when doing aggregations). These filters are passed as query string parameters or JSON 
entity fields.  For filters that represent a set of values, query parameters should use comma-separated 
string values and JSON entity attributes should use JSON Arrays. 

| Parameter    | Type             | Description |
| -----------  | ---------------- | ----------- |
| datetime     | string           | Single date+time, or a range ('/' seperator), formatted to [RFC 3339, section 5.6](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339#section-5.6). Use double dots `..` for open date ranges. |
| bbox         | \[number]        | Requested bounding box.  Represented using either 2D or 3D geometries. The length of the array must be 2*n where n is the number of dimensions. The array contains all axes of the southwesterly most extent followed by all axes of the northeasterly most extent specified in Longitude/Latitude or Longitude/Latitude/Elevation based on [WGS 84](http://www.opengis.net/def/crs/OGC/1.3/CRS84). When using 3D geometries, the elevation of the southwesterly most extent is the minimum elevation in meters and the elevation of the northeasterly most extent is the maximum. |
| intersects   | GeoJSON Geometry | Searches items by performing intersection between their geometry and provided GeoJSON geometry.  All GeoJSON geometry types must be supported. |
| ids          | \[string]        | Array of Item ids to return. All other filter parameters that further restrict the number of search results (except `next` and `limit`) are ignored |
| collections  | \[string]        | Array of Collection IDs to include in the search for items. Only Items in one of the provided Collections will be searched |
| aggregations | \[string]        | A list of aggregations to compute and return |

Only one of either **intersects** or **bbox** should be specified.  If both are specified, a 400 Bad Request response should be returned. 

**aggregations**: There are no named aggregations that must be implemented. All aggregations which are available should be advertised in the root `rel="aggregate"` link. 

This is a list of recommended aggregations to implement:
* count (Single Value of type integer)
* collection (Term Count)
* cloud_cover (Discrete Range)
* datetime_min (Single Value of datetime)
* datetime_max (Single Value of datetime)
* datetime_frequency (Datetime Range, automatic interval detection) -- detect a reasonable interval based on the datetime range and distribution of data. Implementation specific.

maybe these?

* datetime_yearly (Datetime Range, interval=year)
* datetime_quarterly (Datetime Range, interval=quarter)
* datetime_monthly (Datetime Range, interval=month)
* datetime_weekly (Datetime Range, interval=week)
* datetime_daily (Datetime Range, interval=day)
* datetime_hourly (Datetime Range, interval=hour)
* datetime_minutes (Datetime Range, interval=minute)
* datetime_seconds (Datetime Range, interval=second)

## AggregationCollection fields

This object describes a STAC AggregationCollection, which is the analog of an ItemCollection for the `/aggregate` operation.

| Field Name      | Type           | Description |
| --------------- | -------------- | ----------- |
| type            | string         | **REQUIRED** Always "AggregationCollection". |
| aggregations    | \[Aggregation] | **REQUIRED** A possibly-empty array of Aggregations. |

## Aggregation fields

| Field Name      | Type           | Description |
| --------------- | -------------- | ----------- |
| name            | string         | **REQUIRED** The unique indentifier of the aggregation. |         
| data_type       | string         | **REQUIRED** The data type of the aggregation |         
| buckets         | \[Bucket]      | If the aggregation bucketizes Items, they are defined here. |         
| overflow        | integer        | The count of Items that were not categorized into any of the buckets defined by the `buckets` field |         
| value           | string or number or datetime         | For a Single Value aggregation, a JSON-type representation of the result value. |     

One of either **buckets** or **value** is required.

**name** An identifier for the aggregation result. Should be identical to the value passed to the `aggregations` query parameter.

**data_type** numeric, string, datetime, interval_year, interval_month, interval_week
interval_day, interval_hour, interval_minute, interval_second 

**buckets** If the aggregation is a Term Count, Datetime Range, or Discrete Range, these are the "buckets" into which each matching Item is categorized.

**overflow** Some implemenation data stores may have limitations on the aggregation queries that can be performed on them. For example, Elasticsearch limits the number of buckets for a query to 10,000 for performance reasons.  Overflow indicates that there were Items matched by the query that are not accounted for in the count of any of the response buckets. 

**value** For Single Value aggregations, this is a representation of the result value as the equivalent JSON type. If the type of the value being aggregated over is a datetime, this is an RFC 3339 datetime, e.g., "2020-08-12T19:06:09Z". 

## Bucket fields

| Field Name      | Type           | Aggregation Types | Description |
| --------------- | -------------- | ----------------- | ----------- |
| key             | string         | all               | |
| data_type       | string         | all               | |
| frequency       | integer        | all               | |
| from            | numeric        | all               | |
| to              | numeric        | all               | |

## Aggregation Types

### Single Value Aggregation

effectively a single Term Count Bucket lifted up one level

**todo** (diff for String, Numeric, and Datetime)

Example:
    {   
        "type": "AggregationCollection",
        "aggregations": [
            {
                "key": "datetime_min",
                "value": "2000-02-16T00:00:00.000Z",
                "value_as_type": 1.506592E+11
            }
        ]
    }

### Term Count Aggregation

- enumeration count multi bucket one per unique value

Example:
    {   
        "type": "AggregationCollection",
        "aggregations": [
            {
                "key": "collections",
                "buckets": [
                    { 
                        "key": "sentinel2_l1c",
                        "value": "12649072",
                        "value_as_type": 12649072
                    },
                    {
                        "key": "landsat8_l1tp",
                        "value" : "1071997",
                        "value_as_type": 1071997
                    }
                ],
                "overflow": 23414
            }
        ]
    }

### Discrete Range Aggregation

Fields:
* key (string)
* key_as_type ()
* from (optional, missing indicates an open interval) inclusive
* to (optional, missing indicates an open interval) exclusive
* value (integer)

Example:
    {   
        "type": "AggregationCollection",
        "aggregations": [
            {
                "key": "cloud_cover",
                "buckets": [
                    { 
                        "key": "*-5.0",
                        "to": 5,
                        "value" : "8644819",
                        "value_as_type" : 8644819
                    },
                    {
                        "key": "5.0-10.0",
                        "from": 5,
                        "to": 10,
                        "value" : "5644819",
                        "value_as_type" : 5644819
                    },
                    {
                        "key": "10.0-*",
                        "from": 10,
                        "value" : "7644819",
                        "value_as_type" : 7644819
                    }
                ]
            }
        ]
    }

### Datetime Range Aggregation

Fields:
datetimes are RFC 3339 string values

* key (string) 
* key_as_type (datetime in milliseconds?)
* value (integer) (ES: doc_count)

Example:
    {   
        "type": "AggregationCollection",
        "aggregations": [
            {
                "key": "datetime_yearly",
                "buckets": [
                    { 
                        "key": "2000-01-01T00:00:00.000Z",
                        "key_as_type": 946684800000,
                        "to": 5,
                        "value" : "8644819",
                        "value_as_type" : 8644819
                    },
                    {
                        "key": "2001-01-01T00:00:00.000Z,
                        "key_as_type": 978307200000,
                        "from": 5,
                        "to": 10,
                        "value" : "5644819",
                        "value_as_type" : 5644819
                    },
                    {
                        "key": "2002-01-01T00:00:00.000Z,
                        "key_as_type": 1009843200000,
                        "from": 10,
                        "value" : "7644819",
                        "value_as_type" : 7644819
                    }
                ],
                "interval": "year",
                "overflow": 98373 
            }
        ]
    }

Commit message:

add warning about sections that have not been updated

README.md, after:

# STAC API - Aggregation Extension

- **OpenAPI specification:** TBD
- **Conformance Classes:**
  - <https://api.stacspec.org/v1.0.0-rc.2/aggregation>
- **Extension [Maturity Classification](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-api-spec/tree/v1.0.0-rc.2/README.md#maturity-classification):** Proposal
- **Dependencies:**
  - [Core](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-api-spec/tree/v1.0.0-rc.2/core)

The purpose of the Aggregation Extension is to provide an endpoint similar to the Search endpoint (`/search`), but which will provide aggregated information on matching Items rather than the Items themselves. This is highly influenced by the Elasticsearch aggregation endpoint, but with a more regular structure for responses.

## STAC Endpoints

| Endpoint     | Returns                                                        | Description |
| ------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------- |
| `/aggregate` | AggregationCollection | Retrieves an aggregation of the group of Items matching the provided predicates |

The `/aggregate` endpoint behaves similarly to the `/search` endpoint, but instead of returning an ItemCollection of Items, it instead returns aggregated information over the same matching Items in the form of an **AggregationCollection** of **Aggregation** entities.

If the `/aggregate` endpoint is implemented, it is **required** to add a link with the `rel` type set to `aggregate` to the `links` array in root entity (`/`) that refers to the aggregate endpoint in the `href` property. 

`/aggregatables` link and endpoint?

query and filter extensions can be added with #query and #filter appended to cc uri

## Filter Parameters and Fields

The filters for `/aggregate` are the same as those for `/search` that are semantically meaningful (e.g., limit has no meaning when doing aggregations). These filters are passed as query string parameters or JSON 
entity fields.  For filters that represent a set of values, query parameters should use comma-separated 
string values and JSON entity attributes should use JSON Arrays. 

| Parameter    | Type             | Description |
| -----------  | ---------------- | ----------- |
| datetime     | string           | Single date+time, or a range ('/' seperator), formatted to [RFC 3339, section 5.6](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339#section-5.6). Use double dots `..` for open date ranges. |
| bbox         | \[number]        | Requested bounding box.  Represented using either 2D or 3D geometries. The length of the array must be 2*n where n is the number of dimensions. The array contains all axes of the southwesterly most extent followed by all axes of the northeasterly most extent specified in Longitude/Latitude or Longitude/Latitude/Elevation based on [WGS 84](http://www.opengis.net/def/crs/OGC/1.3/CRS84). When using 3D geometries, the elevation of the southwesterly most extent is the minimum elevation in meters and the elevation of the northeasterly most extent is the maximum. |
| intersects   | GeoJSON Geometry | Searches items by performing intersection between their geometry and provided GeoJSON geometry.  All GeoJSON geometry types must be supported. |
| ids          | \[string]        | Array of Item ids to return. All other filter parameters that further restrict the number of search results (except `next` and `limit`) are ignored |
| collections  | \[string]        | Array of Collection IDs to include in the search for items. Only Items in one of the provided Collections will be searched |
| aggregations | \[string]        | A list of aggregations to compute and return |

Only one of either **intersects** or **bbox** should be specified.  If both are specified, a 400 Bad Request response should be returned. 

**aggregations**: There are no named aggregations that must be implemented. All aggregations which are available should be advertised in the root `rel="aggregate"` link. 

This is a list of recommended aggregations to implement:
* count (Single Value of type integer)
* collection (Term Count)
* cloud_cover (Discrete Range)
* datetime_min (Single Value of datetime)
* datetime_max (Single Value of datetime)
* datetime_frequency (Datetime Range, automatic interval detection) -- detect a reasonable interval based on the datetime range and distribution of data. Implementation specific.

maybe these?

* datetime_yearly (Datetime Range, interval=year)
* datetime_quarterly (Datetime Range, interval=quarter)
* datetime_monthly (Datetime Range, interval=month)
* datetime_weekly (Datetime Range, interval=week)
* datetime_daily (Datetime Range, interval=day)
* datetime_hourly (Datetime Range, interval=hour)
* datetime_minutes (Datetime Range, interval=minute)
* datetime_seconds (Datetime Range, interval=second)

## AggregationCollection fields

This object describes a STAC AggregationCollection, which is the analog of an ItemCollection for the `/aggregate` operation.

| Field Name      | Type           | Description |
| --------------- | -------------- | ----------- |
| type            | string         | **REQUIRED** Always "AggregationCollection". |
| aggregations    | \[Aggregation] | **REQUIRED** A possibly-empty array of Aggregations. |

## Aggregation fields

| Field Name      | Type           | Description |
| --------------- | -------------- | ----------- |
| name            | string         | **REQUIRED** The unique indentifier of the aggregation. |         
| data_type       | string         | **REQUIRED** The data type of the aggregation |         
| buckets         | \[Bucket]      | If the aggregation bucketizes Items, they are defined here. |         
| overflow        | integer        | The count of Items that were not categorized into any of the buckets defined by the `buckets` field |         
| value           | string or number or datetime         | For a Single Value aggregation, a JSON-type representation of the result value. |     

One of either **buckets** or **value** is required.

**name** An identifier for the aggregation result. Should be identical to the value passed to the `aggregations` query parameter.

**data_type** numeric, string, datetime, interval_year, interval_month, interval_week
interval_day, interval_hour, interval_minute, interval_second 

**buckets** If the aggregation is a Term Count, Datetime Range, or Discrete Range, these are the "buckets" into which each matching Item is categorized.

**overflow** Some implemenation data stores may have limitations on the aggregation queries that can be performed on them. For example, Elasticsearch limits the number of buckets for a query to 10,000 for performance reasons.  Overflow indicates that there were Items matched by the query that are not accounted for in the count of any of the response buckets. 

**value** For Single Value aggregations, this is a representation of the result value as the equivalent JSON type. If the type of the value being aggregated over is a datetime, this is an RFC 3339 datetime, e.g., "2020-08-12T19:06:09Z". 

## Bucket fields

| Field Name      | Type           | Aggregation Types | Description |
| --------------- | -------------- | ----------------- | ----------- |
| key             | string         | all               | |
| data_type       | string         | all               | |
| frequency       | integer        | all               | |
| from            | numeric        | all               | |
| to              | numeric        | all               | |

## Aggregation Types (TBD)

This section has not been updated to match the previous definitions.

### Single Value Aggregation

effectively a single Term Count Bucket lifted up one level

**todo** (diff for String, Numeric, and Datetime)

Example:
    {   
        "type": "AggregationCollection",
        "aggregations": [
            {
                "key": "datetime_min",
                "value": "2000-02-16T00:00:00.000Z",
                "value_as_type": 1.506592E+11
            }
        ]
    }

### Term Count Aggregation

- enumeration count multi bucket one per unique value

Example:
    {   
        "type": "AggregationCollection",
        "aggregations": [
            {
                "key": "collections",
                "buckets": [
                    { 
                        "key": "sentinel2_l1c",
                        "value": "12649072",
                        "value_as_type": 12649072
                    },
                    {
                        "key": "landsat8_l1tp",
                        "value" : "1071997",
                        "value_as_type": 1071997
                    }
                ],
                "overflow": 23414
            }
        ]
    }

### Discrete Range Aggregation

Fields:
* key (string)
* key_as_type ()
* from (optional, missing indicates an open interval) inclusive
* to (optional, missing indicates an open interval) exclusive
* value (integer)

Example:
    {   
        "type": "AggregationCollection",
        "aggregations": [
            {
                "key": "cloud_cover",
                "buckets": [
                    { 
                        "key": "*-5.0",
                        "to": 5,
                        "value" : "8644819",
                        "value_as_type" : 8644819
                    },
                    {
                        "key": "5.0-10.0",
                        "from": 5,
                        "to": 10,
                        "value" : "5644819",
                        "value_as_type" : 5644819
                    },
                    {
                        "key": "10.0-*",
                        "from": 10,
                        "value" : "7644819",
                        "value_as_type" : 7644819
                    }
                ]
            }
        ]
    }

### Datetime Range Aggregation

Fields:
datetimes are RFC 3339 string values

* key (string) 
* key_as_type (datetime in milliseconds?)
* value (integer) (ES: doc_count)

Example:
    {   
        "type": "AggregationCollection",
        "aggregations": [
            {
                "key": "datetime_yearly",
                "buckets": [
                    { 
                        "key": "2000-01-01T00:00:00.000Z",
                        "key_as_type": 946684800000,
                        "to": 5,
                        "value" : "8644819",
                        "value_as_type" : 8644819
                    },
                    {
                        "key": "2001-01-01T00:00:00.000Z,
                        "key_as_type": 978307200000,
                        "from": 5,
                        "to": 10,
                        "value" : "5644819",
                        "value_as_type" : 5644819
                    },
                    {
                        "key": "2002-01-01T00:00:00.000Z,
                        "key_as_type": 1009843200000,
                        "from": 10,
                        "value" : "7644819",
                        "value_as_type" : 7644819
                    }
                ],
                "interval": "year",
                "overflow": 98373 
            }
        ]
    }
